Add blog post for v1.24 maxUnavailable for StatefulSet (#32638)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2022-05-27-maxunavailable-for-statefulset.md

   that are required. A RollingUpdate on this StatefulSet would take a lot of time before the application is fully updated. If the 
   StatefulSet supported updating more than one pod at a time, it would result in a much faster update.

2. My stateful application is composed of leaders and followers or one writer and multiple readers. I have multiple readers or 
   followers and my application can tolerate multiple pods going down at the same time. I want to update this application more than
   one pod at a time so that i get the new updates rolled out quickly, especially if the number of instances of my application are
   large. Note that my application still requires unique identity per pod.

In order to support such scenarios, Kubernetes 1.24 includes a new alpha feature to help. Before you can use the new feature you must
enable the `MaxUnavailableStatefulSet` feature flag. Once you enable that, you can specify a new field called `maxUnavailable`, part 
of the `spec` for a StatefulSet. For example: 

```
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
  name: web

>   namespace: default

Author: i left it as is for now

spec:
  podManagementPolicy: OrderedReady  # you must set OrderedReady
  replicas: 5
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: k8s.gcr.io/nginx-slim:0.8
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
        name: nginx
  updateStrategy:
    rollingUpdate:
      maxUnavailable: 2 # this is the new alpha field, whose default value is 1
      partition: 0
    type: RollingUpdate
```

If you enable the new feature and you don't specify a value for `maxUnavailable` in a StatefulSet, Kubernetes applies a default

> `maxUnavailable: 1`. This matches the behavior you would see if you don't enable the new feature.

Reviewer: Does it make sense to briefly mention how the percentages work? Or just mention that you can use them?

> I'll run through a scenario based on that example manifest to demonstrate how this feature works. I will deploy a 6 replica StatefulSet,

Reviewer 2: Possibly, this line should read “I will deploy a StatefulSet that has 5 replicas,”?

with `maxUnavailable` set to 2 and `partition` set to 0.

> We can trigger a rolling update, by changing the image to `nginx-slim:0.9`. Once we initiate the rolling update, we can watch the pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can trigger a rolling update, by changing the image to `k8s.gcr.io/nginx-slim:0.9`. Once we initiate the rolling update, we can watch the pods
```

we should probably specify the same registry as in the example

Reviewer: using a cmd could be also useful 

```bash
kubectl set image statefulset web nginx=k8s.gcr.io/nginx-slim:0.9
```

Author: yeah, this imo is not necessary. let me know if any of you feel strongly about it

Reviewer 2: I'm in favor of getting the blog post merged, so long as it renders out and there are no parts that are outright incorrect.

Reviewer: yup it is not necessary and is okay without it

> We can trigger a rolling update, by changing the image to `nginx-slim:0.9`. Once we initiate the rolling update, we can watch the pods
> update 2 at a time as the current value of maxUnavailable is 2. The below output shows a span of time and is not complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I can trigger a rolling update by changing the image to `nginx-slim:0.9`.
Once I initiate the rolling update, I can watch the pods
update 2 at a time as the current value of maxUnavailable is 2.
```

Reviewer: Does it make sense to briefly mention that you can use percentages? And maybe how they work?

web-4   0/1     Pending             0          0s
web-4   0/1     ContainerCreating   0          0s
web-4   1/1     Running             0          1s
web-2   1/1     Terminating         0          5m46s ----> start terminating 2(only after both 4 and 3 are running)
web-1   1/1     Terminating         0          6m6s  ----> start terminating 1
web-2   0/1     Terminating         0          5m47s
web-1   0/1     Terminating         0          6m7s
web-1   0/1     Pending             0          0s
web-1   0/1     Pending             0          0s
web-1   0/1     ContainerCreating   0          1s
web-1   1/1     Running             0          2s
web-2   0/1     Pending             0          0s
web-2   0/1     Pending             0          0s
web-2   0/1     ContainerCreating   0          0s
web-2   1/1     Running             0          1s
web-0   1/1     Terminating         0          6m6s ----> start terminating 0(only after 2 and 1 are running)
web-0   0/1     Terminating         0          6m7s
web-0   0/1     Pending             0          0s
web-0   0/1     Pending             0          0s
web-0   0/1     ContainerCreating   0          0s

> web-0   1/1     Running             0          1s

Reviewer: nit: the rollout shows only 5 pods compared to the 6 we mentioned above

Author: the replicas shouldd be 5 and the pods are numbered 0 to 4

Reviewer 2: :cool::cool:

Reviewer: ack, 5 it is

```
Note that as soon as the rolling update starts, both 4 and 3(the two highest ordinal pods) start terminating at the same time. Pods 
with ordinal 4 and 3 may become ready at their own pace. As soon as both pods 4 and 3 are ready, pods 2 and 1 start terminating at the
same time. When pods 2 and 1 are both running and ready, pod 0 starts terminating. 

In Kubernetes, updates to StatefulSets follow a strict ordering when updating Pod. In this example, the update starts at replica 4, then
replica 3, then replica 2, and so on, one pod at a time. When going one pod at a time, its not possible for 3 to be running and ready 
before 4. When `maxUnavailable` is more than 1(in the example scenario I set `maxUnavailable` to 2), it is possible that replica 3 becomes 

> ready and running before replica 4 is ready-and that is ok. If you're a developer and you set `maxUnavailable` to more than 1, you should 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ready and running before replica 4 is ready&mdash;and that is ok. If you're a developer and you set `maxUnavailable` to more than 1, you should 
```

know that this outcome is possible and you must ensure that your application is able to handle such ordering issues that occur
if any. When you set `maxUnavailable` greater than 1, the ordering is guaranteed in between each batch of pods being updated. That guarantee

> means, that pods in update batch 2(replicas 2 and 1) cannot start updating, until the pods from batch 0(replicas 4 and 3) are ready.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
means that pods in update batch 2 (replicas 2 and 1) cannot start updating until the pods from batch 0 (replicas 4 and 3) are ready.
```

Although Kubernetes refers to these as _replicas_, your stateful application may have a different view and each pod of the StatefulSet may
be holding completely different data than other pods. The important thing here is that updates to StatefulSets happen in batches, and you can

> now have a batch size larger than 1(as an alpha feature).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
now have a batch size larger than 1 (as an alpha feature).
```

Also note, that the above behavior is with `podManagementPolicy: OrderedReady`. If you defined a StatefulSet as `podManagementPolicy: Parallel`,

> not only `maxUnavailable` number of replicas are terminated at the same time, `maxUnavailable` number of replicas start in `ContainerCreating`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
not only `maxUnavailable` number of replicas are terminated at the same time; `maxUnavailable` number of replicas start in `ContainerCreating`
```

phase at the same time as well. This is called bursting.

So, now you may have a lot of questions about:-

> - what is the behavior when you set `podManagementPolicy: Parallel` ?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- What is the behavior when you set `podManagementPolicy: Parallel`?
```

- what is the behavior when `partition` to a value other than `0` ?

> Well, why dont you try it out. This is an alpha feature, and the Kubernetes contributors are looking for feedback on this feature. Did

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Well, why don't you try it out. This is an alpha feature, and the Kubernetes contributors are looking for feedback on this feature. Did
```

> Well, why dont you try it out. This is an alpha feature, and the Kubernetes contributors are looking for feedback on this feature. Did

Reviewer: Can we come up with a better wording for this? :) 

eg. `It might be better to try and see it for yourself.`

      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: k8s.gcr.io/nginx-slim:0.8
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
        name: nginx
  updateStrategy:
    rollingUpdate:
      maxUnavailable: 2 # this is the new alpha field, whose default value is 1
      partition: 0
    type: RollingUpdate
```

If you enable the new feature and you don't specify a value for `maxUnavailable` in a StatefulSet, Kubernetes applies a default
`maxUnavailable: 1`. This matches the behavior you would see if you don't enable the new feature.

I'll run through a scenario based on that example manifest to demonstrate how this feature works. I will deploy a StatefulSet that
has 5 replicas, with `maxUnavailable` set to 2 and `partition` set to 0.

I can trigger a rolling update by changing the image to `k8s.gcr.io/nginx-slim:0.9`. Once I initiate the rolling update, I can 
watch the pods update 2 at a time as the current value of maxUnavailable is 2. The below output shows a span of time and is not 
complete.  The maxUnavailable can be an absolute number (for example, 2) or a percentage of desired Pods (for example, 10%). The 

> absolute number is calculated from percentage by rounding down.  

Reviewer: I can see that in the code and KEP it is really down. But the docs say up https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.24/#rollingupdatestatefulsetstrategy-v1-apps. @krmayankk that is a mistake right?

Author: yes, round down. I will open a seperate PR to fix those docs and api documentation

be holding completely different data than other pods. The important thing here is that updates to StatefulSets happen in batches, and you can
now have a batch size larger than 1 (as an alpha feature).

Also note, that the above behavior is with `podManagementPolicy: OrderedReady`. If you defined a StatefulSet as `podManagementPolicy: Parallel`,
not only `maxUnavailable` number of replicas are terminated at the same time; `maxUnavailable` number of replicas start in `ContainerCreating`
phase at the same time as well. This is called bursting.

So, now you may have a lot of questions about:-
- What is the behavior when you set `podManagementPolicy: Parallel`?
- What is the behavior when `partition` to a value other than `0`?

It might be better to try and see it for yourself. This is an alpha feature, and the Kubernetes contributors are looking for feedback on this feature. Did
this help you achieve your stateful scenarios Did you find a bug or do you think the behavior as implemented is not intuitive or can
break applications or catch them by surprise? Please [open an issue](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues) to let us know.

> Keep an eye on this space, for more blogs to dissect the behavior of this feature in the coming months.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I don't think we can reasonably make that commitment. The blog team is not well staffed.
